
--- Page 1 ---
ROBUST FINANCIAL CALIBRATION :ABAYESIAN APPROACH FOR
NEURAL SDE S
A P REPRINT
Christa Cuchiero∗
University of Vienna,
Department of Statistics and Operations Research,
Kolingasse 14, 1090 Vienna, Austria
christa.cuchiero@univie.ac.atEva Flonner
Vienna University of Economics and Business,
Institute for Statistics and Mathematics,
Welthandelsplatz 1, 1020 Vienna, Austria
eva.flonner@wu.ac.at
Kevin Kurt
IQAM Invest,
Wollzeile 36-38 1010 Vienna, Austria
kevin.kurt@iqam.com
ABSTRACT
The paper presents a Bayesian framework for the calibration of financial models using neural
stochastic differential equations (neural SDEs). The method is based on the specification of a prior
distribution on the neural network weights and an adequately chosen likelihood function. The
resulting posterior distribution can be seen as a mixture of different classical neural SDE models
yielding robust bounds on the implied volatility surface. Both, historical financial time series data and
option price data are taken into consideration, which necessitates a methodology to learn the change
of measure between the risk-neutral and the historical measure. The key ingredient for a robust
numerical optimization of the neural networks is to apply a Langevin-type algorithm, commonly used
in the Bayesian approaches to draw posterior samples.
Keywords model calibration ·Bayesian ·neural SDE ·option pricing ·uncertainty quantification
1 Introduction
In financial institutions, the task of choosing one model from a pool of asset price models, given current market and
historical data, is called calibration. Machine learning techniques started to offer new perspectives on this crucial
task since they are computationally efficient and manage to capture empirically observed market characteristics. For
instance, [ 17] or [ 11] and more recently [ 9] and [ 22] use so-called neural stochastic differential equations (neural SDEs)
for solving the calibration problem in a setting where one is looking for a model which generates given (derivatives’)
market prices. One key feature of neural SDEs is that by the universal approximation property of neural networks
(see [ 15], [23], [31] ), all continuous characteristics of any SDE can be approximated on compacts. This ensures that
the class is certainly rich enough to fit market data. [ 14] provide a global approximation result beyond compacts which
can be useful in the analysis of approximation properties of neural SDEs, since the corresponding paths usually do not
stay in compact sets almost surely.
There are two drawbacks of the standard calibration approach using neural SDEs mentioned above: firstly, possible prior
knowledge on appropriate distributions of the neural network weights is disregarded. Secondly, only point estimates
of neural network weights are provided and thus there is no built-in uncertainty quantification on the resulting option
prices. The latter is important to get robust price bounds for the asset pricing model at hand. In the following we
attempt to tackle these aspects by proposing a Bayesian calibration algorithm for neural SDEs. Traditional calibration
techniques for SDEs often aim to find a model that best replicates market data, in the sense of finding the ’true’ optimum
∗Christa Cuchiero gratefully acknowledges financial support through grant Y 1235 of the START-program.arXiv:2409.06551v3  [q-fin.CP]  12 Sep 2024
--- Page 2 ---
Robust financial calibration: a Bayesian approach for neural SDEs A P REPRINT
with respect to a certain optimization criterion, which can be problematic given the inherently ill-posed nature of
the calibration problem. Instead of seeking a singular solution, our Bayesian framework focuses on determining a
distribution of plausible solutions.
The core concept is to start with a prior distribution for the unknown parameters of the neural SDE model and then update
this prior using the observed market data to derive a posterior distribution. We focus on constructing practical prior and
likelihood functions and assessing the sensitivity of the Bayesian approach, with respect to the hyperparameter choices
of the prior and likelihood functions. Our contribution also addresses the specific challenges of jointly calibrating to
time-series data under the historical measure and derivatives’ price data under the risk neutral measure. This induces
the need for measure changes, which we parameterize again by neural networks.
One goal of this work is to serve as a proof of concept for applying Bayesian techniques to the highly flexible and
dynamic framework of neural SDEs, highlighting the advantages of this approach. By fully integrating the power of
neural networks with the stochastic nature of SDEs and addressing the complexities of including time series data as
well as data on options, our approach opens new avenues for modeling in finance.
1.1 Relation to the literature
More broadly speaking and relating the current work to the literature, the application of machine learning techniques
in mathematical finance has evolved rapidly over the last decades. Indeed, since the 1990s there is a big and steadily
growing number of papers related to this topic, as outlined e.g., in [ 29]. We do not attempt to summarize all of them,
but rather refer to some major milestones in view of model calibration and give a flavour of how to categorize earlier
developments within this research area.
If we focus on neural networks as a machine learning tool the first research category is utilising neural networks
merely as a computational utility or as a method to store information. This is in order to avoid for instance slow and
computationally heavy Monte Carlo sampling e.g. for pricing derivatives like VIX options. An example in this direction
is the work by [ 3] or [ 24]. Another category builds on neural SDEs mentioned above, where the drift and diffusion
function of classical SDEs are modeled by neural networks. Neural SDEs are a promising tool not only for (robust)
pricing, hedging and calibration purposes (see [ 17]) but also for risk management or portfolio optimization. We also
refer to [ 25], [8], [9], [10] and the references therein for learning features of neural SDEs and their employment for
financial applications. In particular, in [ 9] an arbitrage-free neural SDE market model for European options is learnt by
using discrete time series data as well as option price data.
Let us mention in this context also so-called ’Sig-SDEs’ introduced by [ 1], where the volatility of the asset price process
is modeled by means of a linear function of the (extended) signature of the driving Brownian motion. Signature here
refers to the sequence of iterated Stratonovich integrals of the given Brownian motion. For other papers in the realm of
calibration with signature methods we refer to [ 12,13], where the extended signature of some primary process, which
does not have to be the (marked-inferred) Brownian motion, is used. The essence is the linearity of the model, which
allows for fast and accurate calibrations results, using both time-series and implied volatility surface data, of the S&P
500 as well as the VIX index.
Other approaches, also based on machine learning tools, model directly the volatility surface without a dynamical
arbitrage-free model, see e.g., [ 7] and the references therein. This article presents a deep learning method to produce
the whole surface of local volatilities, enforcing no-arbitrage rules by applying Dupire’s formula to impose bounds on
the local volatility related to the option prices.
As far as Bayesian modeling in mathematical finance is concerned, one key reference for the current work is [ 21]. The
paper introduces a Bayesian framework to calibrate local volatility models under the risk neutral measure based on the
market’s derivatives prices. This leads to a posterior distribution of the model parameters. Another Bayesian approach
is adopted in the paper ’Estimate nothing’ by [ 16]. There a mixture of different classical models is considered and a
posterior distribution of the weights of the different models is obtained. To this end, also historical financial time series
data is taken into consideration. More recent work employing Bayesian methods in the area of mathematical finance has
been done by [ 32], where a local volatility model is equipped with a Gaussian process prior. This is done by defining a
prior distribution over local volatility functions through a positive transformation of a Gaussian process with zero mean
function and squared exponential covariance function, ensuring a smooth and positive volatility surface. Additionally, a
hyperprior is placed on the parameters of the covariance function. [ 6] exploit Sequential Monte Carlo methods with a
tempered likelihood to estimate option pricing models, allowing for two stochastic volatility factors, co-jumps between
price and volatility as well as a stochastic jump intensity. The latent states in the Sequential Monte Carlo scheme are
marginalized using risk-neutral cumulants which are given in closed form.
2
--- Page 3 ---
Robust financial calibration: a Bayesian approach for neural SDEs A P REPRINT
As outlined in 1 the goal of the current paper is to unite the efforts described above and provide a Bayesian calibration
framework based on neural SDEs. The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 the model is introduced, in Section
3 we propose a change of measure for neural SDEs, section 4 recalls a variance reduction technique, that is an
essential ingredient for the proposed algorithm, Section 5 and 6 are the core of the paper, as they specify the Bayesian
methodology to calibrate the neural SDE model under the historical and risk neutral measure, Section 7 provides
a sensitivity analysis with respect to hyperparameter values, followed by an empirical study in Section 8, possible
technical modifications in Section 9 and a conclusion inside 10.
2 Stochastic volatility models as neural SDEs
Similarly as in [ 17], fix T > 0and assume a constant interest rate r∈R. Furthermore consider a parameter space
Θ = ΘbV×Θσ×ΘσV⊂Rpand functions bV: [0, T]×R×ΘbV→R,σ: [0, T]×R2×Θσ→Rand
σV: [0, T]×R×ΘσV→R. Let (W1
t)t∈[0,T]be a standard Brownian motion supported on (Ω,F,(Ft)t∈[0,T],Q).
Consider the parametric SDE
dSθ
t=rSθ
tdt+σ(t, Sθ
t, Vθ
t, θ)Sθ
tdW1
t, (1)
dVθ
t=bV(t, Vθ
t, θ)dt+σV(t, Vθ
t, θ)dW2
t, (2)
where dW2
t=ρW1
t+p
1−ρ2Zt, with Ztbeing a Brownian motion independent from W1
t,ρ∈[−1,1]being
constant parameter and where (Vθ
t)t≥0controls the spot variance process in our stochastic volatility model. Note that
the model is free of arbitrage by construction, since (e−rtSθ
t)t∈[0,T]is a local martingale. From now on we will refer
to the risk-neutral measure, corresponding to the neural network parameters θ, asQ(θ). Furthermore define for all
t∈[0, T]andθ∈Rp, the functions bandσxby
b(t,(s, v), θ) := ( rs, bV(t, v, θ ))∈R2andσx(t,(s, v), θ) := ( sσ(t, s, v, θ ), σV(t, v, θ ))∈R2,
where the first component of these functions refers to the Sθ-part and the second to the Vθ-part.
In the case where (σ, bV, σV)are defined to be neural networks we call (1),(2)a system of neural SDEs. In the sequel
we use SθandVθwhenever we refer to the model quantities and SandVwhenever we refer to quantities based on
empirical data.
By the universal approximation property of neural networks discussed in the introduction, all continuous characteristics
of the SDE system (1)-(2)can be approximated on compacts. We also recall that the main advantage of neural SDEs is
that they allow to combine the appealing flexibility of neural networks, in particular in view of optimization techniques
via stochastic gradient descent methods, with well-known theory from mathematical finance based on continuous
semimartingales. In view of model calibration, one main goal of this paper is to present a robust methodology to learn
the parameters of the neural networks (σ, bV, σV)from market data. To this end we take both, derivatives’ prices and
time series data into account.
3 Change of measure for neural SDEs
The calibration of neural SDEs can in principle be extended to the real world measure by considering an additional
parametric function ζ: [0, T]×R2×Rp→R2that could be another neural network and by extending the parameter
space to Θ = Θb×Θσ×Θζ⊂Rp2. LetYt= log Stand define the historical measure P(θ)via the Radon-Nikodym
derivative
dP(θ)
dQ(θ):= expZT
0
ζ1(t, Yθ
t, Vθ
t, θ)
ζ2(t, Yθ
t, Vθ
t, θ)⊤σ(t, Sθ
t, Vθ
t, θ) 0
ρσV(t, Vθ
t, θ)p
1−ρ2σV(t, Sθ
t, Vθ
t, θ)
dW1
t
dW2
t
. (3)
The drift parts under this measure are now defined via
bY,P(t, Yθ
t, Vθ
t, θ):=r−1
2σ(t,exp(Yθ
t), Vθ
t, θ)2+ (σ(t,exp(Yθ
t), Vθ
t, θ))2ζ1(t, Yθ
t, Vθ
t, θ) (4)
+ρσ(t,exp(Yθ
t), Vθ
t, θ)σV(t, Vθ
t, θ)ζ2(t, Yθ
t, Vθ
t, θ), (5)
bV,P(t, Yθ
t, Vθ
t, θ):=bV(t, Vθ
t, θ) +ρσ(t,exp(Yθ
t), Vθ
t, θ)σV(t, Vθ
t, θ)ζ1(t, Yθ
t, Vθ
t, θ) (6)
+ (σV(t, Vθ
t, θ))2ζ2(t, Yθ
t, Vθ
t, θ), (7)
2For notational convenience we still denote the dimension of the parameter space by p
3
--- Page 4 ---
Robust financial calibration: a Bayesian approach for neural SDEs A P REPRINT
where ζplays the role of the market price of risk. Assuming that ζis such that Novikov’s condition is satisfied,
Girsanov’s theorem yields a Brownian motion (WP(θ)
t)t∈[0,T]such that
WP(θ)
t=Wt−Zt
0ζ1(s, Yθ
s, Vθ
s, θ)σ(s, Sθ
s, Vθ
s, θ) +ζ2(s, Yθ
s, Vθ
s, θ)ρσV(s, Sθ
s, Vθ
s, θ)
ζ2(s, Yθ
s, Vθ
s, θ)p
1−ρ2σV(s, Sθ
s, Vθ
s, θ)
ds,
where W= (W1, W2)and
dYθ
t=bY,P(t, Yθ
t, Vθ
t, θ)dt+σ(t,exp(Yθ
t), Vθ
t, θ)dWP(θ),1
t , (8)
dVθ
t=bV,P(t, Vθ
t, θ)dt+σV(t, Vθ
t, θ)(ρdWP(θ),1
t +p
1−ρ2dWP(θ),2
t ). (9)
This neural SDE under the historical measure P(θ)can now be used to learn the market price of risk using market data
such as a time series of asset prices.
Note that the proposal of [ 17] to calibrate under the historical measure as well as under the risk neutral one is actually
implemented and transferred into a Bayesian framework.
4 Variance reduction for Monte Carlo pricing via hedging strategies
As outlined, e.g. in [ 11] and [ 17] variance reduction in the computation of the Monte Carlo price of an option can be
achieved using an approximate hedging portfolio with a large correlation between the option payoff and the hedge.
In our setting this variance reduction will be achieved using hedging strategies which are parameterized via neural
networks. More specifically, consider ptraded hedging instruments (Zt)t∈[0,T](including in particular the traded assets
Sθ) which are square integrable martingales under the risk neutral measure Q(θ)and take values in Rp. Assume that the
payoff of the option is a function of the terminal values of Z, i.e.C=g(ZT). Given a Markovian model the hedging
strategy can now be specified by means of a function
h:R+×Rp→Rp, ht=h(t, z),
where hwill be parameterized as a neural network. Now the optimal hedge determined via some convex loss function
l:R→R+for the claim Cwith corresponding market price Cmktcan be computed by
inf
ξE[l(−C+Cmkt+ (h(·, Z·, ξ)·Z·)T)],
where ξstands for the weights of the neural network hand(h·Z)Tdenotes the stochastic integral with respect to Z.
Modifying the calibration objective via the above explained variance reduction by means of hedging strategies allows a
substantial reduction in the number of Monte Carlo samples.
5 Robust option calibration
To obtain a posterior distribution over derivatives prices and in turn price bounds for derivatives, first a likelihood
function will be specified. Together with a prior distribution p(θ)on the weights θof the neural networks (σ, bV, σV)
appearing in the neural SDE system (1),(2), the desired posterior distribution will then be obtained explicitly. The
calibration to derivatives will be with respect to call options only. However, the loss function specified in the following
subchapter can be easily modified to allow for different terminal value payoffs.
5.1 Option calibration
The likelihood is defined via assumptions on the deviations of the options’ market prices to the ’true’ model prices
as specified below. The observed market prices are specified as mid prices of bid and ask prices, i.e. C(i)
mkt=
1
2 
C(i)bid
mkt+C(i)ask
mkt
,i= 1, ..., J . The options are written on the underlying Sand their payoffs are denoted by
{Φi}J
i=1, where Jdenotes the number of options considered. From now on we assume for notational simplicity that
r= 0, unless specified otherwise. We write C(i)
mod(θ) =EQ(θ)[Φi]for the corresponding model prices with model
parameters θ. Similarly as in [ 21], letδi=104
S0|C(i)ask
mkt−C(i)bid
mkt|denote the basis point bid-ask spread of the ith
option at time zero. Then the basis point calibration error for the ithoption is supposed to be normally distributed as
104
S0(C(i)
mod(θ)−C(i)
mkt)∼ N(0, δ2
i). (10)
4
--- Page 5 ---
Robust financial calibration: a Bayesian approach for neural SDEs A P REPRINT
The natural interpretation of (10) is that in theory there exists a ’true’ model yielding an arbitrage free market and
that the market price of the option equals its model price plus some normally distributed random noise. In order to fit
the implied volatility surface the basis point error function for calibration will be modified using a weighting scheme
(compare [4]). Indeed, define δ2=1PJ
i=11
δ2
iandwi=δ2
δ2
iso that
104
S0(√w1(C(1)
mod(θ)−C(1)
mkt), . . . ,√wJ(C(J)
mod(θ)−C(J)
mkt))∼ N(0, δ2IJ), (11)
where IJdenotes the J×Jidentity matrix. Note thatPJ
i=1wi= 1, by definition. The corresponding likelihood is
then proportional to exp(−1
2δ2G(θ))where G(θ)is defined as
G(θ) =108
S2
0JX
i=1wi|C(i)
mod(θ)−C(i)
mkt|2. (12)
With this specify the Bayesian likelihood function as
-
l(Cmkt|θ) =l((C1
mkt, . . . , CJ
mkt)|θ)∝exp(−1
2δ2G(θ)). (13)
The prior distribution for the neural network weights θplays a crucial role in the Bayesian modeling framework. In
many applications, historical data or expert knowledge may be used for this prior decision. In this work, the prior
choice is found through theoretical considerations about neural network initialization. More precisely, it corresponds to
the so called Glorot normal initialization, introduced in [19]. In this work the authors study the forward pass equation
and back-propagated gradients, inspired by the paper [ 2], who established that the variance of the back-propagated
gradients diminishes as one moves from the output layer to the input layer, even if no training has occurred yet. [ 19]
consider a simplified setting to propose a heuristic for the initialization of neural network parameters, maintaining a
high information flow across layers. The authors suggest to randomly initialize neural network weights drawing from a
normal distribution centered at zero with standard deviation
σprior =g·r
2
fan in +fan out, (14)
where gdenotes an optional scaling factor, fan in stands for the number of neurons in the predecessor layer and fan out
stands for the number of neurons in the successor layer, so that the initialization scheme depends on the width of layers.
Thus, the prior distribution is specified as
p(θ)∼ N(0, σ2
priorIJ). (15)
Since in our architecture, the hidden layers are of width 100, the value of σprior is approximately 0.15 for most neural
network weights, as the scaling factor gis chosen to be 1.5. We will study in a later section how the prior variance
affects the convergence of the suggested algorithm.
The posterior distribution can now be derived explicitly using the prior and likelihood formulated above as
f(θ|Cmkt) =l(Cmkt|θ)·p(θ)∝exp(−1
2δ2G(θ))·exp(−||θ||2
2σ2
prior). (16)
We would like to emphasize that the inclusion of the prior term corresponds to Tikhonov regularization with parameter
δ2/σ2
prior as is explained in [20] for instance.
5.2 Training the model
Note that in practice the true model price for the call option iwith maturity Ti, strike Kiand payoff Φi= (Sθ
Ti−Ki)+,
given by C(i)
mod(θ) =EQ(θ)[Φi], needs to be approximated. The choice of the standard Monte Carlo estimator means
that after simulating Mprice trajectories (ωm)M
m=1a Monte Carlo approximation to C(i)
mod(θ)is given by computing
C(i)
mod(θ) =1
MPM
m=1(Sθ
Ti(ωm)−Ki)+, under the risk-neutral measure. This then leads to an approximation of G(θ)
as
G(θ) =108
S2
0JX
i=1wi|C(i)
mod(θ)−C(i)
mkt|2≈108
S2
0JX
i=1wi|(1
MMX
m=1(Sθ
Ti(ωm)−Ki)+)−C(i)
mkt|2.
5